---
layout: chapter
file: 01-cpp1
---

## Basics

C++ is in some ways a combination of Java and C.
It has syntax and a lot of other features borrowed from C,
but also supports object-oriented programming similar to Java.

If you're not familiar with either of these languages,
you may want to learn one of those first.
C++ should probably not be your first language.
It is old, cumbersome, dangerous, and has some odd conventions.

One interesting aspect of C++ programming is that it is (typically, for most use cases and with a few small syntax changes) backwards compatibile with C.
You can, for all intents and purposes, write a program in C and use a C++ compiler to compile it.

Perhaps one of the most notorious things about C++ (or at least one of the biggest problems the language currently faces) is building,
especially when it comes to using and compiling with libraries.

Just like C, C++ can be compiled using Makefiles.
But usually, we'll use another program to automatically generate those Makefiles, called [CMake](https://cmake.org/).

This is a bit odd, because we've got quite a chain in order to compile our source code.

First we use **CMake** to generate a Makefile.
Then, we use **Make** to execute this make file, in turn calling **g++** or another actual compiler to compile the code.

If we opt to use and IDE instead of compiling on the commandline, we can still use **CMake**.
That's one of the reasons its so commonly used for C++ compilation.

* On OS X, CMake can generate XCode project files for us.
* On Windows, CMake can generate Visual Studio project files for us.

CMake can actually generate a ton of different build files,
so chances are good that if you are using some other IDE it will still be supported.

However, I am an avid Visual Studio user and I kind of don't care for using CMake to build my projects.
So in addition to CMake configuration, I also include ready-built Visual Studio project files for all base codes.
So as long as you are using the latest version of Visual Studio (2017), you don't need to bother with CMake - you can just use my provided files.


## Structs and Objects

C++ objects are similar to C structs, but they allow you to define both data and behavior, unlike C structs which only support data definitions.
The behavior of a C++ object takes the form of member functions, which should be familiar to you as a Java programmer.


## References

```cpp
void swap(int *a, int *b)
{
    int temp = *a;
    *a = *b;
    *b = temp;
}

// elsewhere

int x, y;
swap(&x, &y);
```

```cpp
void swap(int &a, int &b)
{
    int temp = a;
    a = b;
    b = temp;
}

// elsewhere

int x, y;
swap(x, y);
```


## Inheritance

Check out `GeomObject.h`.

Syntax for declaring inheritance:

```cpp
class GeomObject
{
    // ...
};

class Sphere : public GeomObject
{
    // ...
};
```

`public` implies there are other types of inheritance.
It's true, there is `protected` and `private` inheritance.
They are rarely used.


## Memory Allocation

If we want to create instances of our classes, there are two ways to do it.
We can either create them **automatically** (limited to current scope, sometimes called on the stack)
or allocate them **dynamicallly** (on the heap).

```cpp
// Automatic allocation
{
    Vector v1;
    Vector v2 = v1;
    v1.p_x = 3.0;
} // v1 and v2 go "out of scope" here and are deallocated
```

```cpp
// Dynamic allocation
{
    Sphere *sphere = new Sphere();
    Sphere *other = new Sphere();

    scene->AddGeomObject(sphere);

    delete other; // 'other' is deallocated now
} // The pointers 'sphere' and 'other' go out of scope, but what they point to is not deallocated.
// The Sphere instance we created on the first line still exists, and 'scene' can still use it
```

Note: Virtual functions only work on pointers and references.
They don't have to be dynamically allocated, though.

Here, `new` and `delete` replace the C usage of `malloc` and `free`.
There should be no `malloc`s or `free`s anywhere in your code!

Note that to allocate arrays of something (instead of just a single copy), there are special commands:

```cpp
int * my_int_array = new int[10];
my_int_array[4] = 2;
delete[] my_int_array;
```


## Example Files

- [Parsing example including unit tests](https://github.com/iondune/csc473-samplecode/tree/master/parsing)

- [Vector.h](https://github.com/iondune/csc473-samplecode/blob/master/Vector.h)
- [Vector.cpp](https://github.com/iondune/csc473-samplecode/blob/master/Vector.cpp)
- [GeomObject.h](https://github.com/iondune/csc473-samplecode/blob/master/GeomObject.h)

