---
layout: page
active: lectures
title: "Lecture 5: C++ (2)"
auto-title: true
---

Outline:

- Polymorphism in C++
- Class inheritance
- Parsing in C++
- Constructors and Destructors

## Classes

Take a look at `Vector.h` (sample files listed at the bottom of notes) for an example of a C++ class.

First let's look at our constructors and destructors:

```cpp
Vector();                 // default constructor
Vector(Vector *);         // constructor
Vector(const Vector &);   // copy constructor
~Vector();                // destructor
```

Constructors are special member functions used to create instances of our class.
We can have multiple constructors if there are multiple ways to create instances.
In the case of our `Vector` class, we declare a default constructor and two other constructors to give three ways to make a `Vector`.
You might be confused about the use of the `&` symbol in our third constructor, but we'll talk about this in a second - it's a C++ concept called a **reference**.

Finally, we have a destructor.
This function is responsible for destroying the class when it's time for it to be deallocated.

## SRP (Single Responsibility Principle)

This is a general purpose software design principle:

*Every class that you write should have one (and only one!) responsibility.*

In C++ we often talk about "memory management" in terms of being a responsibility.
In other words, if you need to do memory management, then you need to have a class that is solely responsible for memory management.

If you need to add an array of something to a class that you are writing, you should *not* be writing code that allocates and frees memory within that class that already has other responsibilities.
Instead, you should use `std::vector`.

## Example Files

- [Parsing example including unit tests](https://github.com/iondune/csc473-samplecode/tree/master/parsing)

- [Vector.h](https://github.com/iondune/csc473-samplecode/blob/master/Vector.h)
- [Vector.cpp](https://github.com/iondune/csc473-samplecode/blob/master/Vector.cpp)
- [GeomObject.h](https://github.com/iondune/csc473-samplecode/blob/master/GeomObject.h)

## References

- [Rule of Three](http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/rule_of_three)
  - Don't worry about the "Rule of Five" - we will cover this laster in the quarter
